Intro:
Welcome to LLM University by Cohere!
We’re so happy that you’ve chosen to learn Natural Language Processing and Large Language Models with us.

Our comprehensive curriculum aims to give you a rock-solid foundation in NLP, equipping you with the skills needed to develop your own applications. Whether you want to learn semantic search, generation, classification, embeddings, or any other NLP technique, this is the place for you! We cater to learners from all backgrounds, covering everything from the basics to the most advanced topics in large language models (LLMs), ensuring you can harness the full potential of LLMs. Plus, you'll have the opportunity to work on hands-on exercises, allowing you to build and deploy your very own models.

The course covers LLMs starting from the basics, all the way to building and using text representation and text generation models. Its theoretical portion is explained clearly and with analogies and examples rather than formulas, and its practical portion contains lots of useful code examples that will help you solidify your knowledge. It is a one-size-fits-all approach, and learners can pick their own path. For this reason, it is geared for anyone excited about NLP, from beginners in ML, any developer looking to build apps with language AI as well as advanced learners who are ready to put their skills into practice. The course has the following topics, which all serve as starting points depending on your previous knowledge and your goals.

The Curriculum
In this course, you will learn everything about Large Language Models (LLMs), including:

How do LLMs work?: Learn about their architecture and their moving pieces, including transformer models, embeddings, similarity, and attention mechanisms.
What are LLMs useful for?: Learn about many real-world applications of LLMs, including:
Semantic search
Text generation
Text classification
Analyzing text using embeddings
How can I use LLMs to build and deploy my apps?: Learn how to use LLMs to build applications. This course will teach you:
How to use Cohere's endpoints: Classify, Generate, and Embed.
How to build apps, including semantic search models, text generators, etc.
(Coming soon...) How to deploy these apps on many platforms.
By signing up for LLM University, you'll be on your way to mastering NLP and unlocking a world of opportunities in the ever-evolving field of language technology.

Join our Vibrant Community! 🌐
We are taking in our first batch of learners to go through the course materials together! We will be conducting reading groups and hosting events exclusively for you! sign up for Cohere's Discord community where you can connect with fellow learners, share ideas, and receive support throughout your NLP journey. For specific questions and support about LLM University, please visit our #llm-u channel on Discord.

Stay in the loop on all things LLM University by subscribing to our newsletter below!

Let's get started!
We're so excited to take this journey with you! Happy Learning!

The next page: Structure of the Course

Course Modules:

Welcome to LLM University (you are here)
What are Large Language Models?
Text Representation
Text Generation
Updated 5 months ago

WHAT’S NEXT
Next you'll learn about the different modules of the course and their descriptions.
